---
layout: default
title: Contribute
---

Find parslet to be really useful? Or just found a bug that is really ruining
the day for you? Please contribute! Find the code on 
"github":http://github.com/kschiess/parslet.

h2. Contact

Join us on IRC in #parslet. 

Discussion and patches (or the odd cry for 'Help! How can I parse X?') should
go to our mailing list at
"ruby.parslet@librelist.com":mailto:ruby.parslet@librelist.com. Just write a
short message to that address and "librelist":http://librelist.com will
subscribe you. NNTP/web interface can be had through
"gmane.org":http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.ruby.parslet:
<code>gmane.comp.lang.ruby.parslet</code>.

h2. Bugs 

Log in to github and open a bug ticket
"here":https://github.com/kschiess/parslet/issues. Please be sure to include
the version of parslet and Ruby; maybe you can even provide some code that
exhibits the bug?

And of course if you provide a properly tested patch, you'll be our hero and 
get a place in the space below for lifetime. 

h2. Projects

Have you got a project that uses parslet? Please write
"us":mailto:kaspar.schiess@absurd.li about it. 

"*Examples*":https://github.com/kschiess/parslet/tree/master/example/

In here, you can find a parser for a lisp like language and much more. 

"*Capuchin*":https://github.com/matthewd/capuchin

A javascript compiler that targets the rubinius VM. (Matthew Draper)

"*Net::HTTP::Server*":https://github.com/postmodern/net-http-server

A really small and elegant HTTP server written in Ruby. Think Webrick. Using
parslet. (Postmodern)

"*Reak*":https://github.com/rkh/Reak

A smalltalk compiler that targets the rubinius VM. (R. Konstantin Haase)

"*wt* aka working title":https://github.com/kschiess/wt

A small parser that compiles to a postscript file. This is mostly for demoing
the various aspects of a parser.

"*Werd.rb*":https://github.com/rk/werd

A variant of Chris Pound's word generator written in Ruby, with some
improvements. (Robert Kosek)

h2. Thanks for all the fish -- Contributions

* *Josep M. Bach* ("txus":http://www.txustice.me/) for minding the small 
  things that make a big difference.

* *Matthew Draper* ("matthewd":http://matthewd.net/) for bothering with my 
  broken CSS.

* *Hal Brodigan* ("postmodern":http://postmodern.github.com/) for solving our
  email parsing needs!

* *R. Konstantin Haase* ("rhk":http://rkh.im/) for rspec matchers that help
  stamp out, eliminate and abolish redundancy.

* *Florian Hanke* ("floere":http://floere.github.com) has given a lot of very
  inspiring input for parslet. His questions have been key to rounding off the
  corners and making the library as aesthetic as it is. And just look at the 
  logo. 
  
* *Kaspar Schiess* ("absurd.li":http://www.absurd.li) for being brave enough
  to actually add another parser library to a field that's already bursting
  at the seams.