---
title: Documentation
layout: default
---

"*Getting Started*":get-started.html

Are you brand new to parslet? Well then let's introduce you guys. This is what
you should read and try out first. 

"*Examples*":https://github.com/kschiess/parslet/tree/master/example/

Parslet comes with a lot of examples that explain how to use various aspects. 
Take a look at those. 

"*In depth*":overview.html

This is the real technical documentation, showing you how to use all aspects
of parslet. Especially: 

* "Overview":overview.html explains parslet's goals and gives you a bigger
  picture.
* Using "Parslet::Parser":parser.html to *write parsers*.
* Using "Parslet::Transform":transform.html to *transmogrify your intermediary
  trees*.
* "Tricks":tricks.html for common situations.

*Presentations*

* "Parslet, An Introduction":https://docs.google.com/present/view?id=0AfXgUAUtzyc7ZGZrcG1mNXNfMzIwZ3JjY2c3NW0 introduces parslet in a few poignant slides. (Bo Jeanes and David Pick)

*Blogs*

* "Parslet Intro":http://florianhanke.com/blog/2011/02/01/parslet-intro.html
  explains quite a few things on how parsers work and on parser
  metaprogramming. Besides, Florian Hanke also explains how to create an ERB
  parser in just a few lines!
  
* "Parslet and
  JSON":http://jmettraux.wordpress.com/2011/05/11/parslet-and-json/ shows how
  to construct a JSON parser in a few lines.
  "John":http://jmettraux.wordpress.com/about/ does a great job of explaining
  how parslet ties back in with railroad diagrams.
 
"*rdoc Class Documentation*":doc/rdoc-1.2.3/index.html

The rdoc documentation will help you with the nitty gritty.
