---
title: Projects
---

Have you got a project that uses parslet? Please write
"us":mailto:kaspar.schiess@absurd.li about it. 

"*edn-ruby*":https://github.com/relevance/edn-ruby

edn-ruby is a Ruby library to read and write "edn":https://github.com/edn-
format/edn  (extensible data notation), a subset of Clojure used for
transferring data between  applications, much like JSON, YAML, or XML.

"*Examples*":https://github.com/kschiess/parslet/tree/master/example/

In here, you can find a parser for a lisp like language and much more. 

"*Net::HTTP::Server*":https://github.com/postmodern/net-http-server

A really small and elegant HTTP server written in Ruby. Think Webrick. Using
parslet. (Postmodern)

"*regexador*":https://github.com/Hal9000/regexador

An external DSL for Ruby that tries to make regular expressions readable and
maintainable. (Hal Fulton)

"*self-ml*":https://github.com/self-ml/selfml

A "self-ml":http://self-ml.github.io/ implementation using parslet. 
(Ricardo Mendes)

"*thnad*":https://github.com/undees/thnad 

Thnad is a tiny programming language with so few features that it is not
useful for anything at all -- except showing how to write a compiler in half
an hour.

"*Unitwise*":https://github.com/joshwlewis/unitwise

A units of measure library for Ruby. Part of it's magic comes from supporting
the "Unified Code for Units of Measure", which has a formal grammar, described
"here":http://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html#section-Grammar-of-Units-and-Unit-Terms.
The grammar is sufficiently complicated that it can't be solved with regular
expressions (mostly because the grammar is recursive), and was therefore better
suited for a PEG. (Josh Lewis)

"*Werd.rb*":https://github.com/rk/werd

A variant of Chris Pound's word generator written in Ruby, with some
improvements. (Robert Kosek)

"*versionub*":https://github.com/meh/versionub

A semantic version parser. (meh)

"*shortcode*":https://github.com/kernow/shortcode

A ruby gem for parsing Wordpress style shortcodes using parslet. (Jamie Dyer)

"*Simple Java Parser*":https://github.com/parttimenerd/parser-experiments/tree/master/SimpleJavaParser

A simple Java parser that can parse the overall structure of a Java file.

"*crystal*":https://github.com/ruby-in-ruby/crystal

A ruby  virtual machine in 100% ruby, that tries to parse most of ruby syntax
using parslet.
