---
title: Tricks for common situations
---

h2. Matching EOF (End Of File)

Ahh Sir, you'll be needin what us parsers call _epsilon_: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
rule(:eof) { any.absent? }
{% endhighlight %}

Of course, most of us don't use this at all, since any parser has EOF as
implicit last input.

h2. Matching Strings Case Insensitive

Parslet is fully hackable: You can use code to create parsers easily. Here's
how I would match a string in case insensitive manner: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
def stri(str)
  key_chars = str.split(//)
  key_chars.
    collect! { |char| match["#{char.upcase}#{char.downcase}"] }.
    reduce(:>>)
end

# Constructs a parser using a Parser Expression Grammar 
stri('keyword').parse "kEyWoRd"     # => "kEyWoRd"
{% endhighlight %}

h2. Testing

Parslet helps you to create parsers that are in turn created out of many small
parsers. It is really turtles all the way down. Imagine you have a complex 
parser: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
class ComplexParser < Parslet::Parser
  root :lots_of_stuff
  
  rule(:lots_of_stuff) { ... }
  
  # and many lines later: 
  rule(:simple_rule) { str('a') }
end
{% endhighlight %}

Also imagine that the parser (as a whole) fails to consume the 'a' that 
<code>simple_rule</code> is talking about. 

This kind of problem can very often be fixed by bisecting it into two possible
problems. Either: 

# the <code>lots_of_stuff</code> rule somehow doesn't place <code>simple_rule</code>
  in the right context or
# the <code>simple_rule</code> simply (hah!) fails to match its input. 

I find it very useful in this situation to eliminate 2. from our options: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
require 'parslet/rig/rspec'

describe ComplexParser  do
  let(:parser) { ComplexParser.new }
  context "simple_rule" do
    it "should consume 'a'" do
      parser.simple_rule.should parse('a')
    end 
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Parslet parsers have one method per rule. These methods return valid parsers
for a subset of your grammar. 

h2. Error reports

If your grammar fails and you're aching to know why, here's a bit of exception
handling code that will help you out: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
begin
  parser.parse(some_input)
rescue Parslet::ParseFailed => error
  puts error, parser.root.error_tree
end
{% endhighlight %}

This should print something akin to: 

{% highlight text %} 
Parsing 1++2: Don't know what to do with ++2 at line 1 char 2.
`- Unknown error in SUM / INTEGER
   |- Failed to match sequence (INTEGER OPERATOR EXPRESSION) at line 1 char 3.
   |  `- Unknown error in [0-9]{1, } SPACE?
   |     `- Expected at least 1 of \\s at line 1 char 2.
   |        `- Failed to match \\s at line 1 char 3.
   `- Unknown error in [0-9]{1, } SPACE?
      `- Expected at least 1 of \\s at line 1 char 2.
         `- Failed to match \\s at line 1 char 3.
{% endhighlight %}

These error reports are probably the fastest way to know exactly where you
went wrong (or where your input is wrong, which is aequivalent).

And since this is such a common idiom, we provide you with a shortcut: to
get the above, just: 

{% highlight ruby %} 
require 'parslet/convenience'
parser.parse_with_debug(input)
{% endhighlight %}

h2. Line numbers from parser output

A traditional parser would parse and then perform several checking phases,
like for example verifying all type constraints are respected in the input.
During this checking phase, you will most likely want to report screens full
of type errors back to the user ('cause that's what types are for, right?).
Now where did that 'int' come from?

Parslet gives you slices (Parslet::Slice) of input as part of your tree. These
are essentially strings with line numbers. Here's how to print that error
message:

{% highlight ruby %} 
# assume that type == "int"@0 - a piece from your parser output
line, col = type.line_and_column
puts "Sorry. Can't have #{type} at #{line}:#{col}!"
{% endhighlight %}


